CHAPTER

6

Understanding Media
What is your favourite TV programme? What do you like listening to on
the radio? Which newspaper or magazine do you usually read? Do you
surf the internet and what have you found most useful about it? Did you
know that there is one word that is often used to collectively refer to
the radio, TV, newspapers, Internet and several other forms of
communication. This word is ‘media’. In this chapter, you will read
more about the media. You will find out what is required to make it
work, as well as the ways in which the media affects our daily lives. Can
you think of one thing that you have learnt from the media this week?

64 Social and Political Life

Everything ranging from the stall at the local fair to
the programme that you see on TV can be called
media. Media is the plural form of the word ‘medium’
and it describes the various ways through which we
communicate in society. Because media refers to all
means of communication, everything ranging from
a phone call to the evening news on TV can be called
media. TV, radio and newspapers are a form of media
that reaches millions of people, or the masses, across
the country and the world and, thus, they are called
mass media.

Look at the collage on the left and
list six various kinds of media that
you see.

Media and technology
It would probably be difficult for you to imagine your
life without the media. But cable television and the
widespread use of the Internet is a recent
phenomenon. These have been around for less than
twenty years. The technology that mass media uses
keeps changing.
Newspapers, television and radio can reach
millions of people because they use certain
technologies. We also tend to discuss newspapers
and magazines as the print media; and TV and radio
as the electronic media. Why do you think
newspapers are called print media? As you read
further, you will find that this naming is related to
the different technologies that these media use. The
following photographs will give you a sense of the
ways in which technology that mass media uses has
changed over the years and continues to change.
Changing technology, or machines, and making
technology more modern, helps media to reach more
people. It also improves the quality of sound and the
images that you see. But technology does more than
this. It also changes the ways in which we think about
our lives. For example, today it is quite difficult for
us to think of our lives without television. Television
has enabled us to think of ourselves as members of
a larger global world. Television images travel huge

An artist’s impression of Gutenberg
printing the first sheet of the Bible.

Ask older members of your family
about what they used to listen to
on the radio when there was no
TV around. Find out from them
when the first TV came to your
area. When was cable TV
introduced?
How many people in your
neighbourhood use the Internet?
List three things that you know
about some other part of the
world from watching television?

Chapter 6: Understanding Media

65

distances through satellites and cables. This allows
us to view news and entertainment channels from
other parts of the world. Most of the cartoons that
you see on television are mostly from Japan or the
United States. We can now be sitting in Chennai or
Jammu and can see images of a storm that has hit
the coast of Florida in the United States. Television
has brought the world closer to us.
With electronic typerwriters, journalism
underwent a sea-change in the 1940s.

Media and money
The different technologies that mass media use are
expensive. Just think about the TV studio in which
the newsreader sits – it has lights, cameras, sound
recorders, transmission satellites, etc., all of which
cost a lot of money.
In a news studio, it is not only the newsreader
who needs to be paid but also a number of other
people who help put the broadcast together. This
includes those who look after the cameras and lights.
Also, as you read earlier the technologies that mass
media use keep changing and so a lot of money is
spent on getting the latest technology. Due to these
costs, the mass media needs a great deal of money
to do its work. As a result, most television channels
and newspapers are part of big business houses.

John L. Baird sits in front of the
apparatus with which he demonstrated to
the Royal Institute, his invention, the
‘televisor’, an early television.
Can you list three different
products that are advertised
during your favourite TV
programme?
Take a newspaper and count the
number of advertisements in it.
Some people say that newspapers
have too many advertisements. Do
you think this is true and why?

66 Social and Political Life

Mass media is constantly thinking of ways to make
money. One way in which the mass media earns
money is by advertising different things like cars,
chocolates, clothes, mobile phones, etc. You must
have noticed the number of advertisements that you
have to see while watching your favourite television
show. While watching a cricket match on TV, the
same advertisements are shown repeatedly between
each over and so you are often watching the same
image over and over again. As you will read in the
following chapter, advertisements are repeated in the
hope that you will go out and buy what is advertised.

Media and democracy
In a democracy, the media plays a very important
role in providing news and discussing events taking
place in the country and the world. It is on the basis
of this information that citizens can, for example,
learn how government works. And often, if they wish
to, they can take action on the basis of these news
stories. Some of the ways in which they can do this
is by writing letters to the concerned minister,
organising a public protest, starting a signature
campaign, asking the government to rethink its
programme, etc.
Given the role that the media plays in providing
information, it is important that the information be
balanced. Let us understand what we mean by a
balanced media report by reading two versions of
the same news event given on the next page.

The cost to advertise on a TV channel
varies from 1,000 to 1,00,000 per
10 seconds depending on the popularity
of the channel and time.

The print media offers a large variety of
information to suit the tastes of different
readers.

Chapter 6: Understanding Media

67

India Daily Report

Closure of factories caus

News of India Report

Daily News Service

es unrest

T

Mo reo ver the lev els of
ution in the city will be
Violent protests by owners poll
atly redu ced by this
and workers brought the gre
ure. Mr. Jain a wellcity to a standstill today. clos
n figure in the city
Peo ple get ting to wor k know
, “W ith our city
could not do so on time said
bec om ing
ual ly
bec aus e of hug e traf fic grad
as’s new business hub,
jam s. The own ers and Indi
is important that it be a
workers are protesting the it
n and gree n city .
government’s decision to clea
uting factories should
clos e dow n pol luti ng Poll
mov ed. The fac tory
factory units. Although the be
ers and wor ker s
government did take this own
the
acc ept
uld
decision rather hastily, the sho
cation being offered by
protestors have known for relo
government instead of
quite some time that their the
esting.”
uni ts are not leg al. prot
Radhika Malik | INN

Are the above stories in the two
newspapers similar? And if not,
why not? What, in your view, are
the similarities and the
differences?
If you read the story in the News
of India, what would you think
about the issue?

he clo su re of on e lak
h factories in the
city’s residential areas
is likely to become
a serious issue. On Monda
y, thousands of factory
owners and workers too
k to the streets to strongly
pr ote st th is clo su re.
Th ey sa id th at the ir
livelihoods would be los
t. They say that the fault
lies with the municipal
corporation because it
continued to issue licen
ses for new factories to
be set up in residential
areas.They also say tha
t
there were no adequate
relocation efforts. The
owners and workers pla
n a one-day city bandh
to protest against this clo
sure. Mr. Sharma, one
of the factory owners sai
d, “The government say
s
that it has done a lot to rel
ocate us. But the areas
they have sent us to have
no facilities and have
not been developed for
the last five years.”

The fact is that if you had read either newspaper
you would only know one side of the story. If you
had read the News of India, you would most likely
think of the protestors as a nuisance. Their
disrupting traffic and continually polluting the city
with their factories leaves you with a bad impression
about them. But on the other hand, if you had read
the story in the India Daily, you would know that
the protests are because a lot of livelihoods will be
lost if the factories close because the relocation efforts
have not been adequate. Neither of these stories is a
balanced report. A balanced report is one that
discusses all points of view of a particular story and
then leaves it to the readers to make up their minds.
Writing a balanced report, however, depends on
the media being independent. An independent media
means that no one should control and influence its
coverage of news. No one should tell the media what

68 Social and Political Life

can be included and what should not be included in
a news story. An independent media is important in
a democracy. As you read above, it is on the basis of
the information that the media provides that we take
action as citizens, so it is important that this
information is reliable and not biased.
However, the reality is that media is far from
independent. This is mainly because of two reasons.
The first is the control that the government has on
the media. When the government prevents either a
news item, or scenes from a movie, or the lyrics of a
song from being shared with the larger public, this
is referred to as censorship. There have been periods
in Indian history when the government censored the
media. The worst of these was the Emergency
between 1975–1977.

Do you think it is important to
know both sides of the story?
Why?
Pretend that you are a journalist
for a newspaper and write a
balanced story from the two news
reports.

What does TV do to us and what can we do with TV?
In many of our homes, TV is on a lot of the time. In many ways, a lot of our impressions
about the world around us are formed by what we see on TV: it is like a ‘window on the
world’. How do you think it influences us? TV has different types of programmes, soap
operas, like Saas Bhi Kabhi Bahu Thi, game shows, like Kaun Banega Crorepati, reality TV
shows like Big Boss, news, sports and cartoons.
Before, in between and after each programme
are advertisements. Since TV time costs so much
money, only those programmes that can attract
the maximum number of viewers are shown. Can
you think of what such programmes might be?
Think of what are the kinds of things that TV
shows and what it does not. Does it show us
more about the lives of the rich or the poor?
We need to think about what TV does to us,
how it shapes our views of the world, our beliefs,
attitudes and values. We need to realise that it gives us a partial view of the world.While
we enjoy our favourite programmes, we should always be aware of the large exciting
world beyond our TV screens. There is so much happening out there that TV ignores. A
world beyond film stars, celebrities and rich lifestyles, a world that all of us need to reach
out to and respond to in various ways. We need to be active viewers, who question
whatever we see and hear, while we may enjoy it too!

Chapter 6: Understanding Media

69

While the government does continue to censor
films, it does not really censor the media’s coverage
of news. Despite the absence of censorship by the
government, most newspapers nowadays still fail to
provide a balanced story. The reasons for this are
complicated. Persons who research the media have
said that this happens because business houses
control the media. At times, it is in the interest of
these businesses to focus on only one side of the
story. Media’s continual need for money and its links
to advertising means that it becomes difficult for
media to be reporting against people who give them
advertisements. Media is, thus, no longer considered
independent because of its close links to business.
Besides the above, the media also tends to focus
on a particular aspect of a story because they believe
this makes the story interesting. Also, if they want
to increase public support for an issue, they often
do this by focusing on one side of a story.

Setting agendas
The media also plays an important role in deciding
what stories to focus on, and therefore, decides on
what is newsworthy. For example, the annual
function at your school is unlikely to make the news.
But if a famous actor is invited as the Chief Guest,
then the media might be interested in covering it. By
focusing on particular issues, the media influences
our thoughts, feelings and actions, and brings those
issues to our attention. Due to the significant
influence it plays in our lives and in shaping our
thoughts, it is commonly said that the media ‘sets
the agenda’.
Very recently, the media drew our attention to
alarming levels of pesticides in cola drinks. They
published reports that indicated the high level of
pesticides and, thus, made us aware of the need to
regularly monitor these colas according to
international quality and safety standards. They did

70 Social and Political Life

this despite the government’s resistance by boldly
declaring that colas were unsafe. In covering this
story, the media positively helped us focus on an
issue that affects our lives and one that we might
not even have been aware of it had it not been for
media reporting.
There are several instances when the media fails
to focus on issues that are significant in our lives.
For example, drinking water is a major problem in
the country. Every year, thousands of people suffer
and die because they do not get safe drinking water.
However, we seldom find the media discussing this
issue. A well-known Indian journalist wrote of how
the Fashion Week, in which clothes designers show
their new creations to rich people, formed the front
page headlines of all the newspapers while several
slums were being demolished in Mumbai, the very
same week, and this was not even noticed!

Fashion shows are very popular with the
media.
What is the consequence of the
media ‘setting the agenda’ by
reporting on the Fashion Week
rather than the slum demolitions?
Can you think of an issue that

As citizens of a democracy, the media has a very
important role to play in our lives because it is
through the media that we hear about issues related

does not seem important to you
because it is never featured in the
media?

Local media
Recognising that the media will not be interested in
covering ‘small’ issues that involve ordinary people and
their daily lives, several local groups have come forward
to start their own media. Several people use community
radio to tell farmers about the prices of different crops
and advise them on the use of seeds and fertilisers.
Others make documentary films with fairly cheap and
easily available video cameras on real-life conditions
faced by different poor communities, and, at times, have
even given the poor these video cameras to make films
on their own lives.
Another example is a newspaper called Khabar Lahriya which is a fortnightly that is run by
eight Dalit women in Chitrakoot district in Uttar Pradesh. Written in the local language,
Bundeli, this eight-page newspaper reports on Dalit issues and cases of violence against
women and political corruption. The newspaper reaches farmers, shopkeepers, panchayat
members, school teachers and women who have recently learnt to read and write.

Chapter 6: Understanding Media

71

to the working of the government. The media decides
what to focus on and in this way it ‘sets the agenda’.
The government can, at times, prevent the media
from publishing a story and this is called censorship.
Nowadays, media’s close relationship with business
often means that a balanced report is difficult to come
by. Given this, it is important for us to be aware that
the ‘factual information’ that a news report provides
is often not complete and can be one-sided. We,
therefore, need to analyse the news by asking the
following questions: what is the information I am
learning from this report? What information is not
being provided? From whose point of view is the
article being written? Whose point of view is being
left out and why?

Social advertising
Social advertisements
refer to advertisements
made by the Government
or private agencies that
have a larger message
for society. The following
is a social advertisement
regarding crossing of
manned/unmanned
level crossings.

72 Social and Political Life

EXERCISES
1. In what ways does the media play an important role in a
democracy?
2. Can you give this diagram a title? What do you understand
about the link between media and big business from this
diagram?
3. You have read about the ways in which the media ‘sets
the agenda’. What kind of effect does this have in a
democracy? Provide two examples to support your point

BIG BUSINESS HOUSES

Some own radio,
TV, newspaper

advertise
their
products

of view.
4. As a class project, decide to focus on a particular news

People buy
products
seen in the
media.
Money,
therefore,
flows back to
big business
houses

topic and cut out stories from different newspapers on
this. Also watch the coverage of this topic on TV news.
Compare two newspapers and write down the similarity
and differences in their reports. It might help to ask the
following questions–

MEDIA

a. What information is this article providing?

promotes
products
through
advertisements

b. What information is it leaving out?
c. From whose point of view is the article being written?

READERS,
VIEWERS,
LISTENERS

d. Whose point of view is being left out and why?
5. Do projects (solo, pair or group) about types of advertisements. Create commercial advertisements
about some products and social advertisements about public health, road safety and the need to
save water and energy.

Glossary
Publish: This refers to newsreports, articles, interviews, stories, etc., that are printed in newspapers,
magazines and books for a wide audience to read.
Censorship: This refers to the powers that government has to disallow media from publishing or
showing certain stories.
Broadcast: In this chapter this word is used to refer to a TV or radio programme that is widely
transmitted.
Public protest: When a large number of people come together and openly state their opposition to
some issue. Organising a rally, starting a signature campaign, blocking roads etc. are some of the
ways in which this is done.

Chapter 6: Understanding Media

73

UNIT
FIVE

Markets

Teacher’s note
These two chapters focus on aspects of
life and commercial cycles associated with
markets. While some of these processes
may be visible and, therefore, easily
observable, there are also others that are
relatively unfamiliar.
Chapter 7 discusses ‘Markets Around
Us’. At one level, we study different market
sites: a weekly market, neighbourhood
shops, a shopping complex, etc. At another
level, we explore the intricate question,
‘how do goods reach these markets?’ We
examine how a chain of markets operates
and the role of wholesale markets within
this, through the case study of a wholesale
vegetable market. We usually associate
‘market’ with marketplaces, but buying and
selling takes place in diverse ways and the
chapter discusses how all of this falls
within a larger understanding of markets.
Chapter 8 looks at how markets offer
people different opportunities. This is done
through the ‘story of a shirt’, and the chain

of markets involved in the process. Together
with understanding each step of the
manufacture and circulation of a shirt, we
realise that some people stand to gain in
the market transaction whereas others do
not gain as much, or none at all. The
opportunities are highly unequal. Ways do
exist, such as those of cooperative
marketing, which can provide a better
return to the producers. However, we need
to find many more viable avenues for
equitable distribution.
These chapters offer an opportunity of
bringing in the experience of local markets
for discussion in the classroom. A visit to
a wholesale market would be of interest,
and would allow the learner to find out the
profit margins and details of daily earnings
so that those inequalities can be directly
examined. The experiences of markets are
varied and also quite rich. Hence, one
should allocate time for some questions,
not addressed in the text, which students
may wish to discuss.

75

