CHAPTER

4

Growing up as
Boys and Girls
Being a boy or a girl is an
important part of one’s identity. The
society we grow up in teaches us
what kind of behaviour is
acceptable for girls and boys, what
boys and girls can or cannot do.
We often grow up thinking that
these things are exactly the same
everywhere. But do all societies
look at boys and girls in the same
way? We will try and answer this
question in this chapter. We will
also look at how the different roles
assigned to boys and girls prepare
them for their future roles as men
and women. We will learn that
most societies value men and
women differently. The roles
women play and the work they do
are usually valued less than the
roles men play and the work they
do. This chapter will also examine
how inequalities between men and
women emerge in the area of work.

Growing up in Samoa in the 1920s
The Samoan Islands are part of a large group of small
islands in the southern part of the Pacific Ocean. In
the 1920s, according to research reports on Samoan
society, children did not go to school. They learnt
many things, such as how to take care of children or
do household work from older children and from
adults. Fishing was a very important activity on the
islands. Young people, therefore, learnt to undertake
long fishing expeditions. But they learnt these things
at different points in their childhood.
As soon as babies could walk, their mothers or
other adults no longer looked after them. Older
children, often as young as five years old, took over
this responsibility. Both boys and girls looked after
their younger siblings. But, by the time a boy was
about nine years old, he joined the older boys in
learning outdoor jobs like fishing and planting
coconuts. Girls had to continue looking after small
children or do errands for adults till they were
teenagers. But, once they became teenagers they had
much more freedom. After the age of fourteen or so,
girls also went on fishing trips, worked in the
plantations, learnt how to weave baskets. Cooking
was done in special cooking-houses, where boys were
supposed to do most of the work while girls helped
with the preparations.

A Class VII Samoan child
in his school uniform.
In what ways do the experiences
of Samoan children and teenagers
differ from your own experiences
of growing up? Is there anything
in this experience that you wish
was part of your growing up?

Growing up male in
Madhya Pradesh in the 1960s
The following is adapted from an account of
experiences of being in a small town in Madhya
Pradesh in the 1960s.
From Class VI onwards, boys and girls went to
separate schools. The girls’ school was designed very
differently from the boys’ school. They had a central
courtyard where they played in total seclusion and

Why do girls like to go to school
together in groups?

Chapter 4: Growing up as Boys and Girls

39

Make a drawing of a street or a
park in your neighbourhood. Show
the different kinds of activities
young boys and girls may be
engaged in. You could do this
individually or in groups.
Are there as many girls as boys in
your drawing? Most probably you
would have drawn fewer girls. Can
you think of reasons why there
are fewer women and girls in your
neighbourhood streets, parks and
markets in the late evenings or at
night?
Are girls and boys doing different
activities? Can you think of
reasons why this might be so?
What would happen if you
replaced the girls with the boys
and vice-versa?

safety from the outside world. The boys’ school had
no such courtyard and our playground was just a
big space attached to the school. Every evening, once
school was over, the boys watched as hundreds of
school girls crowded the narrow streets. As these
girls walked on the streets, they looked so purposeful.
This was unlike the boys who used the streets as a
place to stand around idling, to play, to try out tricks
with their bicycles. For the girls, the street was simply
a place to get straight home. The girls always went
in groups, perhaps because they also carried fears
of being teased or attacked.
After reading the two examples above, we realise
that there are many different ways of growing up.
Often we think that there is only one way in which
children grow up. This is because we are most
familiar with our own experiences. If we talk to elders
in our family, we will see that their childhoods were
probably very different from ours.
We also realise that societies make cl ear
distinctions between boys and girls. This begins from
a very young age. We are for example, given different
toys to play with. Boys are usually given cars to play
with and girls dolls. Both toys can be a lot of fun to
play with. Why are girls then given dolls and boys
cars? Toys become a way of telling children that they
will have different futures when they become men
and women. If we think about it, this difference is
created in the smallest and most everyday things.
How girls must dress, what games boys should play,
how girls need to talk softly or boys need to be tough.
All these are ways of telling children that they have
specific roles to play when they grow up to be men
and women. Later in life this affects the subjects we
can study or the careers we can choose.
In most societies, including our own, the roles men
and women play or the work they do, are not valued
equally. Men and women do not have the same
status. Let us look at how this difference exists in
the work done by men and women.

40 Social and Political Life

‘MY MOTHER
DOES NOT WORK’
Ma, we are going on a
school excursion. Rosie Ma’am
needs volunteers. Can’t you
take a holiday from office
and volunteer?

Harmeet’s mother
always comes for
excursions, beause
she doesn’t work.

At the Singh’s house
But isn’t that correct aunty?
My mother is a housewife –
she does not work!

Harsharan, Shonali
thinks that your wife
is not a working
person!

Shonali, how can
you say that! You
know that Jaspreet
aunty is up at 5 a.m.
everyday doing all
the housework!

Then Jaspreet, why don’t
you just relax and let them
manage everything for a
change?

Yes, but that’s not real
work, it’s just house work!
Oh! That’s what you
think, do you? Let’s go over
to their house and ask
Jaspreet what she thinks!

What fun! We’ll take care
of everything tomorrow
– with Papa!

Great idea!
OK, I’ll go on strike
tomorrow!

Ha, ha!

Next morning, 7:30 a.m.

Oh God! Look at the time!
Where’s my breakfast? Why aren’t
the children ready?

Hurry, hurry! And
ask Harmeet to switch
on the pump!

Oh-ho! That’s
the school bus! I’ll
have to drop
them in the car.

HONK
HONK

How would I know?
I’m on strike, remember?
Besides, Mangala has also
taken leave today.

41

But, what about the kids’ lunch boxes?
Oh no! Forgot
about that!

I’ll give you some money. Just
buy something from the
canteen today...
Ma already gave us
money for that!

Evening, 6.00 p.m.

DING
DING
I’m exhausted! How about
some tea? Oh, I forgot...your
strike...I’ll make some myself.

The house looks like it
was hit by a hurricane!

Harmeet, where
on earth are the
tea leaves?

Did you expect it to remain in exactly the
same condition in which you left it this
morning, dear?

Hee hee...
I wonder if they
still believe I don’t
work?...and now I have
to remind them that
Chachaji and Chachiji
are coming
for dinner.

Valuing housework
Harmeet’s family did not think that the work Jaspreet
did within the house was real work. This feeling is
not unique to their families. Across the world, the
main responsibility for housework and care-giving
tasks, like looking after the family, especially
children, the elderly and sick members, lies with
women. Yet, as we have seen, the work that women
do within the home is not recognised as work. It is
also assumed that this is something that comes
naturally to women. It, therefore, does not have to
be paid for. And society devalues this work.

42 Social and Political Life

Lives of domestic workers
In the story above, Harmeet’s mother was not the
only one who did the housework. A lot of the work
was done by Mangala, their domestic helper.
Many homes, particularly in towns and cities,
employ domestic workers. They do a lot of work –
sweeping and cleaning, washing clothes and
dishes, cooking, looking after young children or
the elderly. Most domestic workers are women.
Sometimes, even young boys or girls are employed
to do this work. Wages are low, as domestic work
does not have much value. A domestic worker’s
day can begin as early as five in the morning and
end as late as twelve at night! Despite the hard
work they do, their employers often do not show
them much respect. This is what Melani, a
domestic worker had to say about her experience
of working in Delhi – “My first job was with a rich
family that lived in a three-storeyed house. The
memsahib was very strange as she would shout
to get any work done. My work was in the kitchen.
There were two other girls who did the cleaning.
Our day would begin at 5 o’clock. For breakfast
we would get a cup of tea and two dry rotis. We
could never get a third roti. In the evening, when
I cooked the food, the two other girls would beg
me to give them an extra roti. I would secretly
give it to them and make an extra one for myself.
We were so hungry after working through the day!
We could not wear chappals in the house. In the
winter, our feet would swell up with the cold. I
used to feel scared of the memsahib but also felt
angry and humiliated. Did we not work all day?
Did we not deserve to be treated with some
respect?”

Melani with her daughter.

Were Harmeet and Shonali correct
in saying that Harmeet’s mother
did not work?
What do you think would happen
if your mother or those involved
in doing the work at home went
on a strike for a day?
Why do you think that men and
boys generally do not do
housework? Do you think they
should?

In fact, what we commonly term as housework
actually involves many different tasks. A number
of these tasks require heavy physical work. In
both rural and urban areas women and girls have
to fetch water. In rural areas women and girls
carry heavy headloads of firewood. Tasks like

Chapter 4: Growing up as Boys and Girls

43

washing clothes, cleaning, sweeping and picking up
loads require bending, lifting and carrying. Many
chores, like cooking, involve standing for long hours
in front of hot stoves. The work women do is
strenuous and physically demanding — words that
we normally associate with men.
Another aspect of housework and care-giving that
we do not recognise is that it is very time consuming.
In fact, if we add up the housework and the work,
women do outside the home, we find that women
spend much more time working than men and have
much less time for leisure.
Below is some data from a special study done
by the Central Statistical Organization of India
(1998–1999). See if you can fill in the blanks.
State

Women Paid Women Unpaid
(Work hours (Housework
per week)
hours per week)

Haryana
Tamil Nadu

23
19

30
35

Women
(Total)
?
?

Men Paid
Men Unpaid
Men
(Work hours (Housework
(Total)
per week)
hours per week)
38
40

2
4

?
?

What are the total number of work
hours spent by women in Haryana

Women’s work and equality

and Tamil Nadu each week?

As we have seen the low value attached to women’s
household and care-giving work is not an individual
or family matter. It is part of a larger system of
inequality between men and women. It, therefore,
has to be dealt with through actions not just at the
level of the individual or the family but also by the
government. As we now know, equality is an
important principle of our Constitution. The
Constitution says that being male or female should
not become a reason for discrimination. In reality,
inequality between the sexes exists. The government
is, therefore, committed to understanding the reasons
for this and taking positive steps to remedy the
situation. For example, it recognises that burden of
child-care and housework falls on women and girls.

How does this compare with the
total number of work hours spent
by men?

Many women like Shonali’s mother in
the story and the women in Tamil Nadu
and Haryana who were surveyed work
both inside and outside the home. This is
often referred to as the double burden of
women’s work.

44 Social and Political Life

This naturally has an impact on whether
girls can attend school. It determines
whether women can work outside the
house and what kind of jobs and careers
they can have. The government has set up
anganwadis or child-care centres in several
villages in the country. The government
has passed laws that make it mandatory
for organisations that have more than 30
women employees to provide crèche
facilities. The provision of crèches helps
many women to take up employment
outside the home. It also makes it possible
for more girls to attend schools.

Children at an Anganwadi centre in a
village in Madhya Pradesh.

Sustainable Development Goal (SDG)
www.in.undp.org

Chapter 4: Growing up as Boys and Girls

45

What do you think this poster is trying to say?

This poster was created by a women’s group in
Bengal. Can you write an interesting slogan for
the poster?

46 Social and Political Life

EXERCISES
1. Are the statements given alongside true or false? Support
your answer with the use of an example –

a. All societies do not think
similarly about the roles that boys
and girls play.

2. Housework is invisible and unpaid work.
b. Our society does not make
distinctions between boys and

Housework is physically demanding.

girls when they are growing up.

Housework is time consuming.
Write in your own words what is meant by the terms
‘invisible’, ‘physically demanding’, and ‘time consuming’?
Give one example of each based on the household tasks

c. Women who stay at home do
not work.
d. The work that women do is less

undertaken by women in your home.

valued than that of men.
3. Make a list of toys and games that boys typically play and
another for girls. If there is a difference between the two
lists, can you think of some reasons why this is so? Does
this have any relationship to the roles children have to
play as adults?
4. If you have someone working as a domestic help in your
house or locality talk to her and find out a little bit more
about her life – Who are her family members? Where is
her home? How many hours does she work? How much
does she get paid? Write a small story based on these
details.

Glossary
Identity: Identity is a sense of self-awareness of who one is. Typically, a person can have several
identities. For example, a person can be a girl, a sister and a musician.
Double-burden: Literally means a double load. This term is commonly used to describe the women’s
work situation. It has emerged from a recognition that women typically labour both inside the
home (housework) and outside.
Care-giving: Care-giving refers to a range of tasks related to looking after and nurturing. Besides
physical tasks, they also involve a strong emotional aspect.
De-valued: When someone is not given due recognition for a task or job they have done, they can
feel de-valued. For example, if a boy has put in a lot of effort into making a special birthday gift for
his friend and this friend does not say anything about this, then the boy may feel de-valued.

Chapter 4: Growing up as Boys and Girls

47

