Social Science

Social and Political Life – II
Textbook for Class VII

2024-25

2024-25

Social Science

Social and Political Life – II
Textbook for Class VII

2024-25

0764 – Social and Political Life –II

ISBN 81-7450-672-1

Textbook for Class VII

First Edition				
February 2007 Phalguna 1928

ALL RIGHTS RESERVED

Reprinted
February 2008, March 2009,
January 2010, December 2010,
January 2012, November 2012,
November 2013, December 2014,
January 2016, January 2017,
December 2017, January 2019,
January 2020, March 2021,
August 2021 and November 2021



No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system
or transmitted, in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical,
photocopying, recording or otherwise without the prior permission of the
publisher.



This book is sold subject to the condition that it shall not, by way of trade,
be lent, re-sold, hired out or otherwise disposed of without the publisher’s
consent, in any form of binding or cover other than that in which it is published.



The correct price of this publication is the price printed on this page, Any revised
price indicated by a rubber stamp or by a sticker or by any other means is
incorrect and should be unacceptable.
OFFICES OF THE PUBLICATION
DIVISION, NCERT

Revised Edition
			
November 2022 Kartika 1944
Reprinted
			
March 2024 Chaitra 1946
PD 575T SU
© National Council of Educational
Research and Training, 2007, 2022

NCERT Campus
Sri Aurobindo Marg
New Delhi 110 016

Phone : 011-26562708

108, 100 Feet Road
Hosdakere Halli Extension
Banashankari III Stage
Bangaluru 560 085

Phone : 080-26725740

Navjivan Trust Building
P.O.Navjivan
Ahmedabad 380 014

Phone : 079-27541446

CWC Campus
Opp. Dhankal Bus Stop
Panihati
Kolkata 700 114

Phone : 033-25530454

CWC Complex
Maligaon
Guwahati 781 021

Phone : 0361-2674869

Publication Team

` 65.00

Printed on 80 GSM paper with NCERT
watermark

Head, Publication
Division

: Anup Kumar Rajput

Chief Editor

: Shveta Uppal

Chief Production
Officer

: Arun Chitkara

Chief Business
Manager (In charge)

: Amitabh Kumar

Assistant Editor

: Shashi Chadha

Assistant Production
Officer

: Rajesh Pippal

Published at the Publication Division
by the Secretary, National Council
of Educational Research and
Training, Sri Aurobindo Marg,
New Delhi 110 016 and printed at Arun
Packers & Printers, C-36 Lawrence
Road Industrial Area, Delhi 110 035

Cover
Fatma Nasir
Layout
Orijit Sen with Splash Communications
Illustrations
Orijit Sen

2024-25

Prelims.indd 4

4/10/2024 10:08:32 AM

Foreword
The National Curriculum Framework (NCF), 2005, recommends that children’s
life at school must be linked to their life outside the school. This principle marks
a departure from the legacy of bookish learning, which continues to shape our
system and causes a gap between the school, home and community. The syllabi
and textbooks developed on the basis of NCF signify an attempt to implement this
basic idea. They also attempt to discourage rote learning and the maintenance of
sharp boundaries between different subject areas. We hope these measures will
take us significantly further in the direction of a child-centred system of education
outlined in the National Policy on Education (1986).
The success of this effort depends on the steps that school principals and
teachers will take to encourage children to reflect on their own learning and
to pursue imaginative activities and questions. We must recognise that given
space, time and freedom, children generate new knowledge by engaging with the
information passed on to them by adults. Treating the prescribed textbook as
the sole basis of examination is one of the key reasons why other resources and
sites of learning are ignored. Inculcating creativity and initiative is possible if we
perceive and treat children as participants in learning, not as receivers of a fixed
body of knowledge.
These aims imply considerable change in school routines and mode of functioning.
Flexibility in the daily timetable is as necessary as rigour in implementing the
annual calendar so that the required number of teaching days is actually devoted
to teaching. The methods used for teaching and evaluation will also determine
how effective this textbook proves for making children’s life at school a happy
experience, rather than a source of stress or boredom. Syllabus designers have
tried to address the problem of curricular burden by restructuring and reorienting
knowledge at different stages with greater consideration for child psychology and
the time available for teaching. The textbook attempts to enhance this endeavour by
giving higher priority and space to opportunities for contemplation and wondering,
discussion in small groups, and activities requiring hands-on experience.
The National Council of Educational Research and Training (NCERT) appreciates
the hard work done by the textbook development committee responsible for this
book. We wish to thank the Chairperson of the advisory group in Social Sciences,
Professor Hari Vasudevan, the Chief Advisor, Sarada Balagopalan and the Advisor,
Arvind Sardana for guiding the work of this committee. Several teachers contributed
to the development of this textbook; we are grateful to their principals for making
this possible. We are indebted to the institutions and organisations which have
generously permitted us to draw upon their resources, material and personnel.

2024-25

We are especially grateful to the members of the National Monitoring
Committee, appointed by the Department of Secondary and Higher
Education, Ministry of Human Resources Development under the
Chairpersonship of Professor Mrinal Miri and Professor G.P. Deshpande,
for their valuable time and contribution. As an organisation committed to
systemic reform and continuous improvement in the quality of its products,
NCERT welcomes comments and suggestions which will enable us to
undertake further revision and refinement.

New Delhi
20 November 2006

Director
National Council of Educational
Research and Training

vi
2024-25

Rationalisation of Content in the
Textbooks
In view of the COVID-19 pandemic, it is imperative to reduce content
load on students. The National Education Policy 2020, also emphasises
reducing the content load and providing opportunities for experiential
learning with creative mindset. In this background, the NCERT has
undertaken the exercise to rationalise the textbooks across all classes.
Learning Outcomes already developed by the NCERT across classes
have been taken into consideration in this exercise.
Contents of the textbooks have been rationalised in view of
the following:
• Overlapping with similar content included in other subject areas in
the same class
• Similar content included in the lower or higher class in the same
subject
• Difficulty level
• Content, which is easily accessible to students without much
interventions from teachers and can be learned by children through
self-learning or peer-learning
• Content, which is irrelevant in the present context
This present edition, is a reformatted version after carrying out the changes
given above.

vii
2024-25

Constitution of India
Part IV A (Article 51 A)

Fundamental Duties
It shall be the duty of every citizen of India —
(a) to abide by the Constitution and respect its ideals and institutions, the
National Flag and the National Anthem;
(b) to cherish and follow the noble ideals which inspired our national
struggle for freedom;
(c) to uphold and protect the sovereignty, unity and integrity of India;
(d) to defend the country and render national service when called upon to
do so;
(e) to promote harmony and the spirit of common brotherhood amongst
all the people of India transcending religious, linguistic and regional
or sectional diversities; to renounce practices derogatory to the dignity
of women;
(f) to value and preserve the rich heritage of our composite culture;
(g) to protect and improve the natural environment including forests, lakes,
rivers, wildlife and to have compassion for living creatures;
(h) to develop the scientific temper, humanism and the spirit of inquiry
and reform;
(i) to safeguard public property and to abjure violence;
(j) to strive towards excellence in all spheres of individual and collective
activity so that the nation constantly rises to higher levels of endeavour
and achievement;
* (k) who is a parent or guardian, to provide opportunities for education
to his child or, as the case may be, ward between the age of six and
fourteen years.
Note: The Article 51A containing Fundamental Duties was inserted by the Constitution (42nd
Amendment) Act, 1976 (with effect from 3 January 1977).
*(k) was inserted by the Constitution (86th Amendment) Act, 2002 (with effect from
1 April 2010).

2024-25

Textbook Development Committee
Chairperson, Advisory Committee for Social Science Textbooks at the Upper
Primary Level
Hari Vasudevan, Professor, Department of History, University of Calcutta, Kolkata

Chief Advisor
Sarada Balagopalan, Centre for the Study of Developing Societies (CSDS), Rajpur
Road, Delhi

Advisor
Arvind Sardana, Eklavya–Institute for Educational Research and Innovative
Action, Madhya Pradesh

Members
Anjali Monteiro, Professor, Tata Institute of Social Sciences (TISS), Mumbai
Anjali Noronha, Eklavya – Institute for Educational Research and Innovative
Action, Madhya Pradesh
Anuradha Sen, H-701, Som Vihar, R.K. Puram, New Delhi
Dipta Bhog, Nirantar – Centre for Gender and Education, New Delhi
Krishna Menon, Reader, Lady Shri Ram College, New Delhi
Latika Gupta, Consultant, Department of Elementary Education (DEE), NCERT
M.V. Srinivasan, Lecturer, Department of Education in Social Sciences and
Humanities (DESSH), NCERT
Malini Ghose, Nirantar – Centre for Gender and Education, New Delhi
Mary E. John, Director, Centre for Women’s Development Studies (CWDS),
New Delhi
N.B. Sarojini, Sama – Resource Group for Women and Health, New Delhi
Rangan Chakravarty, A 4/7, Golf Green Urban Complex, Phase 1, Kolkata
Sanjay Dubey, Reader, DESSH, NCERT
Shobha Bajpai, Government Middle School, Uda, District Harda, Madhya Pradesh
Sukanya Bose, Eklavya Research Fellow, 66 F Sector 8, Jasola Vihar, New Delhi

Member-coordinator
Malla V.S.V. Prasad, Lecturer, DESSH, NCERT

2024-25

Acknowledgements
This book has benefited from its association
with several individuals and institutions. These
include Poonam Batra, Piu Dutt, S. Mohinder and
Aditya Nigam who read most of the chapters in the
book and gave us helpful feedback. In addition,
Rajeev Bhargav, Kaushik Ghosh, Anu Gupta,
Sunil and A.V. Ramani discussed ideas and
commented on particular chapters. V.Geetha was
gracious in agreeing to read all of the chapters
and her extensive comments have enriched
this book substantially. Anjali Monteiro and
S. Shankar shared with us their ideas on the
media at different stages and helped us expand
upon that particular chapter in meaningful ways.
Smriti Vohra also agreed to do some last
minute editing without realising how much she
had taken on, and we thank her for her time and
careful editing. Similar to his role in the Class
VI book, Alex George has been of significant
help with his insights, ideas and information.
Urvashi Butalia continues to be generous with
her time and willingness to serve as editor,
thereby ensuring that this text has gained from
her perceptive reading.
We thank Zubaan for allowing us to use poster
images from their book Poster Women: A Visual
History of the Women’s Movement in India. We
would also like to thank Trimurti Films Private
Ltd. for allowing the use of the Deewar clip.
Partners For Law and Development graciously
allowed us to use their image on page 63. The
Principal, teachers and students of Class VI B at
the Kendriya Vidyalaya II at Hindon, Ghaziabad
readily agreed to work on the wallpaper and the
collage that we have used in the book and were
kind in allowing us to photograph this as well.
We would also like to thank Geetanjali, Sr. PRO,
Northern Railway, for the public advertisement
and the UNDP India for the material about
the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs).
M. Quraishy at SARAI also extended his help
when required and we thank him for this.
The photographs that this book uses were
procured from various sources and we are deeply
grateful to all these institutions and individuals.
The Centre for Science and Environment (CSE)
was more than generous with their photographs

and Amit Shankar and Anil with their time.
Outlook Magazine also shared with us, at very
short notice, photos from their archives. Sheeba
Chacchi provided us with her photos for the
photo-essay on the women’s movement. Salil
Chaturvedi and Shahid Datawala helped provide
appropriate images from their collection. Mahesh
Basadia provided us with photos of the Tawa
Matsya Sangh (TMS) and the Mahila Balvikas
Department at Dewas gave us the image of the
Anganwadi. Harsh Man Rai and Baji Rao Pawar
also contributed their photos as well as helped
click new photos that we needed. M.V. Srinivasan
helped with coordinating the photos from Erode.
We thank Navdanya for some of the images used
for the collage on health. Sarada Balagopalan also
helped click some of the images used in this book.
The passion and patience that Orijit Sen
and Salil Chaturvedi have invested as the main
illustrator and designer of this book can be seen
in every page, and we thank them for this.
Eklavya played a crucial role in the translation
of this book into Hindi and we would, in
particular, like to thank Rashmi Paliwal for her
supervision of the process and Tultul Biswas for
helping facilitate this.
Several institutions have played a key role
in not only being understanding about our
pre-occupation with this book but in actively
assisting its development in numerous ways.
The Centre for the Study of Developing Societies
(CSDS), Eklavya, Nirantar, Centre for Women’s
Development Studies (CWDS) and Sama have
been generous in their support.
The Council acknowledges the valuable
inputs for analysing syllabi, textbooks and the
content proposed to be rationalised for this
edition by Kavita Jain, PGT, Political Science,
Ashok Vihar; Maneesha Pandey, Professor,
Department of Political Science, Hindu College,
University of Delhi; Shankar Sharan, Associate
Professor, DESS, NCERT; Vanthangpui Khobung,
Assistant Professor, RIE, Bhopal, NCERT; and
Sunita Kathuria, PGT, Political Science, MCL
Saraswati Bal Mandir, Hari Nagar, New Delhi.

2024-25

Introductory note for teachers
There is a substantial difference between
Civics and Social and Political Life, not only
in terms of the topics covered but also in the
pedagogic approaches required in each subject
area. Keeping these in mind, this Introduction
attempts to clarify certain aspects of Social and
Political Life.

What is Social and Political Life?
Social and Political Life (SPL) is a new subject
area in middle school social science that has
replaced the earlier subject of Civics. The National
Curriculum Framework (NCF) 2005 strongly
argues that Civics should be discontinued
and its focus on government institutions and
functioning should be tempered in the new
subject that replaces it. SPL, as its name
suggests, focuses on topics related to social,
political and economic life in contemporary
India.

What pedagogical
approach does SPL use?
SPL’s use of ‘real-life’ situations is a marked
departure from Civics. SPL uses these real
situations to teach concepts because it recognises
that children learn best through concrete
experiences. It uses material that draws upon
the experiential understanding of familial and
social issues that middle school children bring to
the classroom. SPL further develops the learner’s
abilities to critically understand and analyse
these issues in keeping with the tenets of the
Indian Constitution.
This pedagogical approach tends to avoid the
use of definitions to sum up a concept. Instead,
it uses case studies and narratives to explain
concepts. The concepts embedded within the
narratives are made clear through the in-text
and end-text questions. The aim is to have the
learner understand the concept through their
own experiences and write about it in their own
words.
This often means that there is seldom one
‘correct’ answer to the questions posed. However

Case studies and narratives used in SPL
are a mix of rural and urban examples.

there is a wrong answer. Teachers should try
to gauge whether an answer to a question
adequately reflects the learner’s understanding
of the concept being discussed.

Given that children learn best through
understanding and applying concepts
to local realities, can a ‘national’
textbook adequately reflect the many
‘locals’ that make up the nation?
SPL functions by the pedagogic principle that
children learn best through an experiential
understanding of concepts. This poses a
contradiction when the effort is to write a ‘national’
textbook, because a national text can neither
sufficiently represent all the various aspects
of the various locals, nor fix the sociocultural
background of the child for whom the book
is intended. Therefore, the case studies and
narratives used in SPL are a mix of rural and
urban examples in which the assumed learner
is not easily discernible.

2024-25

discussed the ideal and seldom deliberated upon
the reality that was very different. Since the
learner is already aware of such realities, to avoid
discussing them would make the learning of social
and political concepts didactic and disconnected.
Instead, SPL uses this embedded awareness to
make the learner understand and accept not only
the legitimacy but also the urgency of the values
enshrined in the Constitution. Additionally, this
approach allows the learner to understand the
role of people’s struggles in the realisation of
these values.

The SPL text specifically names
communities, for example, Dalit, Muslim,
poor, etc. SPL counts on the teacher
to transact the material with a firm
committment to respecting the dignity
of all students.

What are the issues included in the
Class VII textbook?

In addition to the important job of
transacting the text, what crucial role
does SPL expect teachers to play in
the classroom?
SPL counts on the teacher to play a very
significant role in the classroom for the following
reasons. First, the SPL text specifically names
communities (for example: Dalit, Muslim,
poor etc.) in its discussion of various issues
and this may lead to some discomfort in a
classroom that has a student population from
different sociocultural and (perhaps) economic
backgrounds. We expect the teacher to play a
crucial role in transacting this material with a
sensitivity and firm commitment to respecting the
dignity of all students in the classroom and the
school. Second, given the limited ability of this
‘national’ text to engage the local we also envision
the teacher playing a major role in adding local
examples to the discussion of concepts, provided
these remain true to the logic and understanding
of each concept as intended by the book’s authors.

The theme for the Class VII grade book is
the crucial role that equality plays in Indian
democracy. This theme also serves as one of the
Units in addition to which the book has four
more Units. These include Health and State
Government; Gender; Media; and Markets.
Units 2, 3 and 5 consist of two consecutive
chapters, except in the case of the first Unit.

What elements does the Class VII book
utilise to explain selected issues?
 Storyboards: One component of the feedback
regarding Class VI book (Social and Political Life-I)
was that teachers needed more assistance in
understanding where fictional narratives began
and ended and in identifying the central concepts
within these. With this in mind, this year’s book
introduces storyboards to clearly indicate which
segments have been fictionalised, and to draw

The house looks like it
was hit by a hurricane!

How does the SPL help the learner
assimilate the values enshrined in the
Constitution?
At first glance it might appear to some that unlike
Civics, SPL’s focus on ‘real’ examples contradicts
the tenets of the Constitution. Such a focus,
however, is a technique utilised in SPL in response
to a critique of Civics textbooks that always only

xii
2024-25

Did you expect it to remain in exactly
the same condition in which you left
it this morning, dear?

the learner into the narrative through the use of
visuals that are often more expressive than lines
of text. Specific concepts raised through the
storyboards are analysed in the accompanying
text.
 Unit Pages: Each Unit begins with a Unit Page
for teachers to help highlight the main points
raised in the chapters.
 Note on Evaluation: As with the Class VI
text, this book does not contain definitions or a
synthesis of concepts. While we recognise that
this makes it difficult for teachers to evaluate
what the child has learnt, our attempt is also to
try and shift some of the understanding amongst
teachers on what children are expected to learn
and how such learning should be evaluated.
This book contains a short note on evaluation
procedures that we hope will assist teachers in
their efforts to move students away from rote
learning.
 Glossary: The inclusion of a Glossary with
each chapter is intended to offer the learner
greater clarity on the language used in the
text. The words of the Glossary are NOT limited
to concepts, and it should not be viewed as
something to be memorised with the expectation
that such rote learning will contribute to
conceptual understanding.
 In-text and End-text Questions: As with the
Class VI text, this year’s book includes in-text and
end-text questions, making use of visual material
and experiential analysis. In-text questions found
within the text can be used to assess the extent
to which content has been assimilated. End-text
questions usually cover the main concepts raised
by the chapter and ask learners to explain these
in their own words.

xiii
2024-25

Teacher’s note on evaluation
Rethinking the ways in which we evaluate learning is a difficult task but one that
this new subject area requires. Over the years our evaluation system has for the
most part rewarded students who learnt by rote. This involuntarily encouraged
many teachers to mark or underline the answers in the text and in this way a
vicious cycle in which each reinforced the other, was produced. It is this system
that needs to be changed to relieve both the teacher and the student. Teachers will
play a significant role in changing evaluation and this note is an effort in
this direction.
On questions
Teachers need to begin by insisting that evaluation be based on ‘new’ questions. These will be similar
to the ones used in the text, but not the same. Students will be expected to answer these questions in
their own words. The confidence to do this needs to be built in the students and language corrections
should, therefore, be tactful and gentle.
Teachers will also need to design a variety of questions that cover a range of skills. Questions that
demand recalling information by rote should be minimal. Instead, there needs to be different kinds of
questions based on the main conceptual ideas of each chapter. Some may be designed to draw upon
the learner’s ability to reason; to compare and contrast experiences; and to infer and extrapolate
from situations provided.
The following are some examples taken from this text to explain the above:

Ability to reason
These questions aim to gauge the extent to which the learner has understood the concepts
included in the chapter and is able to articulate its main ideas in their own words as well as
apply these to different contexts. Examples of this include:
What do you understand by the
term, “all persons are equal before
the law”? Why do you think it is
important in a democracy?

Can you list two ways in which
you feel that advertising affects
issues of equality in a democracy?

Why should the decisions taken
by the Chief Minister and other
ministers be debated in the
Legislative Assembly?

How do you think your
neighbourhood shop gets its
goods? Find out and explain with
some examples.

xiv
2024-25

Compare and contrast experiences
These questions require the learner to draw upon the main ideas in the text by comparing and
contrasting concrete situations. These questions often involve the child’s own experiences.
Examples of this include:
What is the difference between the
work that MLAs do in the Assembly
and the work done by government
departments?
In what ways do the experiences
of Samoan children and teenagers
differ from your own experiences
of growing up? Is there anything
described in this experience that you
wish were part of your growing up?

What differences do you find between
private and public health services in your
area? Use the following table to write
about these.
Facility

Cost of services

Availability of service

Private		
Public

Compare the earnings per shirt of
the worker in the garment factory,
the garment exporter and the
shop-owner in the US. What do
you find?

Infer and extrapolate from situations
This type of question is important to SPL because of the extensive use of narratives to explain
concepts as well as the constant reference to the learner’s own experiences. It is these questions
that link the narrative to the underlying concept. The learner’s ability to understand the narrative
as well as its explication of the concept can be gauged through these questions.
In India it is often said that we are
unable to provide health services
for all because the government
does not have enough money and
facilities. After reading the left
hand column above do you think
that this is true? Discuss.

Were Harmeet and Shonali correct
in saying that Harmeet’s mother
did not work?

What does this ad want me to
feel when I use this brand?

xv
2024-25

Interpreting visual material
Similarly students should have an opportunity to read and interpret visual material. Hence
there should be questions based on pictures, tables, flowcharts, etc.

1

Look at the photograph and think about
the boy who is being carried down the
stairs. Do you think the above law is being
implemented in his case? What needs to be
done to make the building more accessible
for him? How would his being carried down
the stairs affect his dignity as well as his
safety?

2

3

Can you give this diagram a title? What do
you understand about the link between
media and big business from this diagram?

The shirt below shows the profit made
by the businessperson, and the various
costs that he had to pay. Find out from
the diagram below, what the cost price
includes.

BIG BUSINESS HOUSES

Some own
radio, TV,
newspaper

advertise
their
products

Profit
` 900

People buy
products
seen in the
media. Money,
therefore,
flows back to
big business
houses

Advertising
` 400
Storage
` 200
Purchase
` 300

MEDIA
promotes
products through
advertisements

READERS,
VIEWERS,
LISTENERS

xvi
2024-25

On answers
Since the learner is being asked to write in their own words teachers will need to stop expecting ‘exact’
responses. Instead, the learner should be encouraged to state in their own words their understanding
of the material and concepts they’ve read. Their comprehension, ability to soundly reason and
communicate their ideas is what needs to be evaluated.
It would also be fair to expect a range of correct answers when the learner is asked to think through
a particular narrative situation and apply the underlying concept. It is crucial that teachers discuss
a common evaluation scheme that helps them distinguish between the range of correct answers as
well as more crucially identify wrong answers.

Other forms of evaluation
We need to demystify the stress on examinations as the best tool for evaluating the learner. Rather
than wait for alternate evaluation structures to trickle down from the higher grades, we need to use
the learner’s years in middle school to experiment with other ways of evaluation. For this purpose we
need to use different methods, some of which are briefly discussed below –
 Open-book exercises: As the name implies ‘open-book’ is a process in which the learner is allowed
to refer to the textbook while answering a question. Open book exercises offer children an opportunity
to pick out answers without feeling the burden of “remembering the details”. The learner would be
asked to read portions of the text again with the question in mind. New questions are essential for this
exercise. Questions based on the learner’s ability to infer, extrapolate and apply concepts are ideal
for open-book exercises. Answering the question in the learner’s own words should be emphasised.
 Oral reasoning and comprehension: Children express so much through speaking and sharing in
a classroom. Yet, most often, our current educational system tends to regard this as ‘useless talk’.
Learning from peers and expressing themselves through the spoken word is something that needs to
be encouraged. Oral evaluation exercises provide an avenue through which to value this. A number
of in-text questions in this book can be answered orally and the teacher should begin this process in
the classroom.
 Collective project work: Collective project work is another way to evaluate students. Preparing
a wall-paper is one such example used in the text. The expectations from these projects should be
reasonable and limited to what learners can do on their own. Project work should be done in the
classroom and not as homework. Many end-text questions in this book can be converted into small
projects.
These forms of evaluation help emphasise that learning is continuous and happens in multiple
ways. Evaluation should be designed to enable and encourage this learning and not be reduced to a
filtering mechanism.

xvii
2024-25

2024-25

